And we ought to praise Him with every breath that He's given us.
What a blessing.
Thank the Lord for His goodness in our lives.
First Timothy chapter number two, some of you have already worked on First Timothy 315,
our memory verse for the month of March.
It's only March the third, and some have said, I got a long time to work on it.
Some have said, I got it, I'm working on it, I'm in the process.
And so I hope that you will spend time this morning, we're going to be looking at First
Timothy 2.8, which was our memory verse for the month of February.
And many of you memorized it in the month of February, rehearsed it during Sunday school
many times, and even last Wednesday evening rehearsed it.
And First Timothy 2.8, the Bible says this, I will therefore that men pray everywhere
lifting up holy hands without wrath and doubting.
Obviously as we look at this text of scripture in First Timothy chapter two, we find that
the subject matter of prayer is obvious and evident.
We've understood that even in our message last week, that in the midst of this exhortation
on prayer and the importance of prayer, that God gives us, He reveals to us three aspects
of His will for humanity.
And we dealt with that last Sunday morning, that God's will is for lost people to be saved,
God's will is for saved people to grow spiritually, and God's will is for saved people to share
the gospel.
And so we dealt with that last week, and I said this in the message last week, it was
almost like it's a parenthetical statement within the exhortation that's given to us
on prayer, and we find that the emphasis is here on prayer.
The subject of prayer is vital, and every believer must determine to spend time with
God in prayer.
The emphasis is obvious, the examples are abundant.
As you study the scriptures, you find that there's many examples of God's people who
prayed.
Jesus left us an example that we should follow His steps, and regularly in His life, in His
earthly ministry, He prayed, leaving us that example.
And we find this morning, that as we look at this text of scripture, and we come to
verse number eight, I look at it really as three prerequisites that God gives us for
effectual prayer.
I've titled the message this morning, Effectual Prayer, and the reality this morning is I'm
not interested in simply going through the motions.
I'm not interested this morning when we talk about prayer as it being simply a religious
exercise.
We understand that as we approach the Lord, that we want to approach Him properly, that
I desire to commune with Him, He is my Father.
What a blessing and privilege it is that we can enter into His presence, and I want to
see God answer prayer in my life.
Have you seen God answer prayer in your life?
In a very specific situation this week that came up on Thursday, and it was just kind
of a real bother for me, and I just prayed, and I said, God, would you just deal with
this?
I don't have the ability to deal with this, God, would you deal with it?
And with just a matter of hours, God dealt with it, and I was rejoicing, I was so thankful
for it.
It was a little thing, maybe somebody would say, but it's a big thing to me, and I appreciate
that we can enter into the presence of God.
But when we think about prerequisites, if you will, for effectual prayer, we understand
and we're reminded that in James 5 and verse 16, the end of the verse says, the effectual,
fervent prayer of a righteous man availeth much.
You know, during the earthly ministry of the Lord Jesus Christ, there were many who prayed,
but not all the prayers were effectual prayers.
Amen?
During the earthly ministry of the Lord Jesus Christ, He looked at some of the religious
leaders of the day, those that could wax eloquent, those that could stand and could
just give order as they would give a presence of their ability to speak, and people would
listen to their prayers and they would stand in awe, if you will, and Jesus said, no, listen,
when you pray, don't pray like the publicans, don't pray like, excuse me, like the Pharisees
or like the Sadducees, like these religious leaders, why?
Because they're not praying in the appropriate manner.
Notice in Matthew 6, we're here in 1 Timothy, we'll come back, but notice in Matthew 6,
if you will, and these that were given as Jesus is giving this exhortation here, we
find that He's saying, when thou prayest, He's speaking to His people, to us this morning.
Notice in verse number 5 of Matthew 6, the Bible says this, and when thou prayest, thou
shalt not be as the hypocrites are, for they love to pray standing in the synagogues and
in the corners of the streets.
Notice what it says, that they may be seen of men.
What was their motive?
They wanted somebody to say, did you hear that guy pray?
I mean, did you hear how eloquent he was?
I mean, he's a great orator, I mean, he just, man, he waxed eloquent.
They wanted to be seen of men, and Jesus says, verily I say unto you, they have their reward.
You know what their reward is?
The applause of man, the recognition of man, the ones that are standing and saying, did
you hear him?
Yeah, that's their reward.
That's it.
That's not what we're looking for, that's not effectual prayer.
Notice in verse number 6, but thou, when thou prayest, enter into thy closet, when thou
hast shut thy door, pray to thy Father which is in secret, and thy Father which seeth in
secret shall reward thee openly.
He says, but when you pray, verse 7, use not vain repetitions as the heathen do, for
they think that they shall be heard for their much speaking.
Be not therefore like unto them, for your Father knoweth what things ye have need of
before ye ask him.
Aren't you thankful for that truth?
Listen, when we think about effectual prayer and we look at this portion of Scripture in
1 Timothy 2.8, I believe that God gives us some indications here, some prerequisites
with regard to effectual prayer.
When we talk about prayer, we've spent several weeks now, we're going to, as we look at the
subject matter of prayer, we agree that it's important, it's vital, it should be a part
of each of our lives, we ought to have structure in our prayer lives, we ought to be committed
to a time of prayer, having a place, and so on and so forth, and we understand the importance,
we agree this morning, but when we want to have effectual prayer, I mean prayer that
is effective, understand with me this morning that prayer, God has chosen that prayer moves
the hand of God.
It's amazing to me that God has chosen, ordained it to be so, that prayer moves the hand of
God.
God said to Jeremiah, call unto me and I will answer thee and show thee great and mighty
things which thou knowest not.
We find that he says, ask and ye shall receive, knock and it shall be opened, and we begin
to understand these wonderful promises of prayer, but understand with me this morning
that God has given us some prerequisites in this verse of Scripture with regard to
how we can have effectual prayer.
There's a lot of praying that goes on.
You ever heard somebody, a lost person says, would you pray for me?
They don't understand prayer the same way we understand prayer.
Would you agree with that statement?
They don't understand prayer the same way that we understand prayer, and I'm thankful
this morning that when we pray, we're entering into the presence of God Almighty who has
all power, who's able to do exceeding abundantly above all that we ask or think, but how is
it as we study the Scriptures, what is it that is needed in your life and my life that
we might have effectual prayer?
On 1 Timothy 2.8, back in our text of Scripture, the Bible says, I will therefore that men
pray everywhere, lifting up holy hands without wrath and doubting.
If you're taking notes this morning, I want you to notice first of all the importance
of being clean, the importance of being clean.
The Bible says holy hands.
I will therefore that men pray everywhere, lifting up holy hands.
The idea of this phrase holy hands is undefiled by sin, free from wickedness.
The idea is pure.
Now understand with me, God knows our frame.
He knows that we are but dust.
He understands our frame, but this morning as we look at this subject of effectual prayer,
being effective in our prayer lives, we understand that He says that I will therefore that men
pray everywhere, lifting up holy hands.
We're never going to reach a place of sinless perfection, but let me say this, if there's
no sin in your life, if there's no sin in my life, it better be confessed.
Because when we approach a holy God, we approach Him in the manner in which He tells us to
approach Him, and if we want our prayer life to be effective, we are going to have to be
clean.
Psalm 51 is a great passage of Scripture that deals with the psalm of repentance of David.
We find that in that text of Scripture, he talks about the desire to be clean, and I've
mentioned this before, it's not a desire to be cleaner, it's a desire to be clean.
And we understand this morning the importance of cleanliness.
We understand this morning if you were going to have some breakfast before you came to
church, if you're going to drink a cup of coffee or some other beverage before you came
to church this morning, you wanted a clean cup, a clean plate, a clean fork, a clean
spoon.
You didn't want to go and grab a plate that had some crusty stuff all over it, and someone
just takes a little towel and wipes it off and says, there you go.
You say, that might be cleaner than it was, but it's not clean.
Amen?
This morning we find that He says that we're to lift up holy hands.
We'll never be perfect.
However, we understand this morning that our God is ready to forgive.
Aren't you thankful for that?
We have the promise that when we sin and when we confess that sin, that God says that He
will cleanse us from all unrighteousness.
What a blessing.
See, prayer is hindered by sin.
And so therefore, if I want my prayer to be effective.
If I understand this passage of Scripture dealing with effectual prayer and understanding
the prerequisites, we find first and foremost he says that we are to be clean, holy hands.
The effectual prayer of a righteous man availeth much.
I believe that there's truth as we look at that passage of Scripture, that verse of Scripture
in James 5 and verse 16 where the Bible would speak of positional righteousness.
And I'm thankful that I have been declared righteous.
If you're saved this morning, you've been declared righteous.
In fact, the Bible would teach us that the righteousness of Christ has been imputed upon
our accounts.
For God hath made him, Jesus, to be sin for us who knew no sin, that we might be made
the righteousness of God in him.
And I'm thankful for the truth of positional righteousness.
But what I tell you this morning is that God is concerned about practical righteousness,
that we live right, that we live holy lives, clean lives, pure lives.
And again, I understand that we'll never be perfect, but when we understand this morning
this truth of effectual prayer, the importance of being clean is given to us in this verse
of Scripture.
Notice a few verses with me in the book of James.
Look at James chapter 1 if you will.
We've referenced James 5, 16 a couple of times, but look if you will at James chapter
1.
And I want you to notice what God tells us in verse number 27.
James 1 and verse number 27.
The Bible says this, pure religion and undefiled before God and the Father is this, to visit
the fatherless and the widows in their affliction, notice, and to keep himself unspotted from
the world.
Have you found that this world is against you?
Have you found that it's easy to get dirty in this world?
So if we're going to keep ourselves unspotted from the world, that's going to require some
action on our part.
It's going to require some diligence.
It's going to require some purpose in our lives that we're going to be unspotted from
the world.
Why?
Because we live in this world.
We're in the world, but thank God we're not of the world.
Listen, what's happening in our society today, this huge issue with quote-unquote Christendom
in America today, is that there's been this real blur and this real blending and there's
not this distinction that God desires for there to be.
I mentioned this on Wednesday evening in 1 Thessalonians 5 and verse 16, rejoice evermore.
And I said this is different and we're to live different.
Why?
Because we are different.
And he says that we're to be unspotted from the world.
Notice with me in 1 Peter chapter 1.
We see this truth in James 1.
Look in 1 Peter 1.
We find that God gives us this important truth with regard to understanding the fact that
we're to be clean.
He says in 1 Peter 1 beginning in verse 13, wherefore, gird up the loins of your mind,
be sober and hope to the end for the grace that is to be brought unto you at the revelation
of Jesus Christ.
Now notice these next verses.
In verse 14, as obedient children, not fashioning yourselves according to the former lust in
your ignorance, but as he which hath called you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of
conversation.
Because it is written, be holy for I am holy.
You know it's interesting during the earthly ministry of the Lord Jesus Christ, Jesus enters
into the temple and he turns over the tables, you remember?
You know he does that at the beginning of his earthly ministry and does it again at
the end of his earthly ministry.
And what does that reveal to us?
Well, if we're not careful, things are going to creep in.
And we find here that as we look at this principle and this truth, if I want my prayer life to
be effectual, to be effective, then I must understand the importance of being clean.
Of being clean.
It's easy for things to get dirty.
I remember my mother-in-law, before she was my mother-in-law, when I would go over to
the house where Holly was living when we were dating, she had this little thing on her refrigerator
and it said, I cleaned my house yesterday, I wish you could have seen it.
And I remember the first time I saw that, I thought it was kind of comical.
And the reality is that what happens, you can clean your house today, you can clean
it tomorrow, and you can find out that a week from tomorrow it's going to need to be cleaned
again.
Right?
It's just what happens.
It's just a cycle.
Listen, if we're not proactive, if we're not purposed on this idea of having a clean life,
we're going to be spotted from this world.
We're going to be defiled.
We're going to have things that are going to cause us to be dirty.
And we find this morning that we're to be clean, we're to live holy, we're to be holy
in all manner of conversation.
In 1 John 3 and verse 22, God gives us this wonderful truth with regard to having our
prayers answered and to understanding that He answers prayer.
And notice what 1 John 3 and verse 22 says, and whatsoever we ask, we receive of Him.
But notice this, it says, because we keep His commandments and do those things that
are pleasing in His sight.
I've written in the margin of my Bible, are we?
Are we what?
Are we keeping His commandments?
Are we doing those things that are pleasing in His sight?
Have you ever heard anyone say, my prayers aren't being answered?
Well, if that's the case in our lives, we ought to do some examination.
Why aren't my prayers being answered?
Are my prayers not in accordance with God's will?
Maybe my prayers aren't being answered because sin is hindering my prayer life.
And we begin to examine those things and we find that this truth, I will therefore that
men pray everywhere, lifting up holy hands.
The importance of being clean.
Sin will hinder prayer.
Psalm 66 and verse 18 is a verse that's familiar to many of us.
We won't turn there.
We're going to turn to the book of Isaiah.
But in Psalm 66, 18, the Bible says this, if I regard iniquity in my heart, notice this
phrase, the Lord will not hear me.
It's not a matter that He cannot hear you, it's that He will not hear you because you
have iniquity in your heart.
Listen, I'm thankful that God says He'll forgive.
But he that covereth his sin shall not prosper.
That's what the Bible says.
And we find that we can confess and we can forsake and that person finds grace and finds
mercy and has forgiveness and what a blessing that is.
But this morning, God is interested in His people being holy.
God has given some prerequisites.
He says when we enter into His presence, listen, if you have sin in your life, if there's some
sin in your life, you can go to God and you can get that cleansed.
You can be clean of that so that you can have effectual prayer.
First in the book of Isaiah, if you will, we're going to look at chapter one and then
we're going to look at chapter 59 of the book of Isaiah.
There's 66 chapters of the book of Isaiah and I wish we could look at more verses throughout
the book of Isaiah because so often this thought or this theme is recurring throughout the
book.
But I want to look in chapter one and then I want to look at chapter 59 and I want you
to notice a couple of things with regard to the importance of being clean when it comes
to this subject matter of effectual prayer.
Holy hands, undefiled by sin, free from wickedness, pure.
Notice in Isaiah one, in verse 15, the Bible says this, and when you spread forth your
hands, I will hide mine eyes from you.
Yea, when you make many prayers, I will not hear why your hands are full of blood.
Notice when he says in verse 16, wash you, make you, what does it say, clean.
Put away the evil of your doings from before mine eyes.
Cease to do evil, learn to do well.
Seek judgment, relieve the oppressed, judge the fatherless, plead for the widow.
Come now, God says, let us reason together, saith the Lord.
Though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be, what, white as snow.
Though they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool.
If ye be willing and obedient, ye shall eat the good of the land.
But if you refuse and rebel, ye shall be devoured with the sword, for the mouth of the Lord
hath spoken it.
We look in this passage of scripture and we see that God says, you're going to pray in
verse number 15, but I'm not going to hear you.
Why?
Because of sin.
Because your hands are full of blood.
Because you're doing evil.
And he says, put away the evil.
He says, learn to do well.
He says, come, let us reason together, I offer forgiveness.
He says there in verse number 18, though you, notice, your sins be as scarlet, they shall
be as white as snow.
He says you're dirty, you're defiled, you're full of sin, but you need to be clean.
Notice in chapter 59 of the book of Isaiah, in Isaiah 59, notice what the Bible says here
in verses 1 through 3.
Verse 1 is a great promise, but it doesn't end with a period.
It's interesting.
In verse number 1 it says, behold, the Lord's hand is not shortened that it cannot save.
Neither is ear heavy that it cannot hear.
Aren't you thankful for those two truths in verse number 1?
Do you see that it doesn't end with a period?
Notice in verse 2, but your iniquities, what is that, your sin, have separated between
you and your God and your sins have hid His face.
from you, that he will not hear. For your hands are defiled with blood, and your fingers
with iniquity. Your lips have spoken lies, your tongue hath muttered perverseness."
Notice the great promise. I mean, it's an unclaimed promise because God says in verse
number one, his hand is not short that it cannot save, neither is his ear heavy that
it cannot hear, but he's not going to hear. Why? Because you have sin, you're not clean.
So what do we do? Well, knowing that we have a God who's ready to pardon, a God who's ready
to forgive, we run to God for forgiveness. We say, as David said, wash me, cleanse me.
I mean, clean me, help me to be right in your sight against thee, and the only. Have I sinned
and done this wickedness? And we get cleansed so that our prayers can be effectual, so that
we can have effective prayer. As we look at these prerequisites in 1 Timothy 2 and verse
number 8, the first that we see is the importance of being clean. What of this morning? As we
examine our lives, as we begin to look, and here in chapter number 59 of Isaiah, he talks
about the hands are defiled with blood, your fingers with iniquity, but then he talks about
your lips have spoken lies, your tongue hath muttered perverseness. You know how many of
us get in trouble with our tongues? We say things, and then we act like it's no big deal.
We need to understand the importance of being clean, being clean. Why isn't God answering
my prayer? God promised to answer prayer. I hope you've experienced prayer being answered
in your life, but if God's not answering your prayer, and I'm not saying that he's not answering
it just in the way that you want it to be answered. Understand sometimes God says no.
Is that valid? Did he not say to Paul, my grace is sufficient for thee? Paul said remove
this, and God said my grace is sufficient for thee. But understand this morning that
when we enter into the presence of a holy God, he says that we're to come with holy
hands. We're to be clean. And I'm thankful this morning that it's not based upon your
merit or my merit that we're cleansed. It's based upon God's great mercy and his great
forgiveness. It's in his nature and character he says that he will pardon, he will forgive.
What happens sometimes is there's so much pride in the life of an individual that they
refuse to acknowledge their sin, they refuse to go to the throne of grace and confess that
sin and find forgiveness, and therefore they live their lives with hindered prayer lives.
When all along God says I'll forgive you, I'll forgive you. Now understand we're speaking
in this context this morning, we're not talking about being forgiven meaning going to heaven.
We're talking about sin in a life of a believer that hinders our fellowship. I'm thankful
that we're, our relationship is constant. He's my father, I'm his child. What a blessing.
But I want that fellowship to be sweet. I want to say as the songwriter said, I want
nothing between my soul and my savior. Neil Moody is famously known for saying that sin
will keep you from this book or this book will keep you from sin. But I would say to
you this morning that really when you have prayer, when you have sin in your life, not
only is your prayer hindered, but honestly you don't want to pray like you should pray
anyway because you have sin in your life. And you know it. You're not dealing with it.
God says as he said to those in Isaiah 1, come let us reason together. If you be willing,
right? It's a decision that we make that we go to God and we say this is wrong, this is
sin. I agree with you God. This is wicked. God forgive me. And we take the wonderful
promise that he said that he will. And he'll clean us, cleanse us from all unrighteousness.
So Paul says, I will therefore that men pray everywhere, lifting up holy hands. Prerequisite
number one, we understand the importance of being clean. Number two, if you're taking
notes this morning, I would say this, the importance of being controlled by the Holy
Spirit. The importance of being controlled by the Holy Spirit. I'm thankful this morning
to be a New Testament believer. I'm thankful this morning that God let me be born when
I was born. He let me hear the gospel when I heard the gospel. Let me be saved when I
was saved. And what a blessing to know the Lord Jesus Christ and to have a completed
Bible this morning. And we find today that as we look at the scriptures, that as a New
Testament believer, we have this promise, we have this truth that the Holy Spirit of
God indwells every believer. I didn't understand it when I got saved, but I understand it since
I've been saved that at the very moment that I trusted Christ as my Savior, the Holy Spirit
of God indwelled me. I didn't understand all of that when I first got saved, but I
look at the scriptures and I read and I understand that God says at that moment I was indwelled
by the Holy Spirit of God. The Bible tells us that our bodies are the temple of the Holy
Spirit, which is in you, which you have of God. We're not our own. We're bought with
a price in 1 Corinthians 6, verses 19 and 20. We find the truth, the Bible tells us
in Ephesians chapter 1, that the Holy Spirit is the earnest of our inheritance. And what
a blessing to understand the indwelling of the Holy Spirit of God, but we understand
that there's not only the indwelling, but there's the filling of the Holy Spirit of
God. You might be indwelled with the Spirit of God, but filled with self. You can be indwelled
with the Spirit of God and also filled with the Spirit of God. The Bible says in Ephesians
5, verse 18, that we're to be filled with the Spirit. By the way, this is a continual
thing. He says, be not drunk with wine or in excess, but be filled with the Spirit.
This is continual. This is an everyday thing that, why? Because self wants to be the ruler
of your heart and mind. But we're to be filled with the Spirit of God. We're to, according
to Galatians 5, we're to walk in the Spirit so that we do not fulfill the lust of the
flesh. When we look at this text of scripture and we find that the first prerequisite is
the importance of being clean, we look at this verse and he says, I will therefore that
men pray everywhere, lifting up holy hands without wrath. Why do I say that we're to
be controlled with the Spirit of God, controlled by the Holy Spirit? Well, this idea of without
wrath means anger or violent passion. We understand from Galatians 5 the importance of walking
in the Spirit so that we do not fulfill the lust of the flesh, but it's in Galatians 5
that we find that anger is a work of the flesh. We find this morning that as we begin to think
about anger, we understand that anger is a strong emotion. Anger often, if we're not
careful, will lead to sin in the life of an individual. We find that anger is this emotion
and we all have experienced times in our lives where we've been angry. I'm thankful that
God, though He turned over the tables like I mentioned a few moments ago, He did not
sin. And we're given the encouragement in God's Word, in Ephesians 4, we're going to
look at a couple of verses that we're to put off and put on. It's interesting to me that
in both of those passages of Scripture, God talks about the subject of anger. In Ephesians
4, turn there first if you will, and notice with me in Ephesians 4, the charge begins
in verse number 22 with regard to putting off some things and putting on some things
in verse 24, and then it begins to be illustrated in the verses to follow. We find that this
put off and put on principle is there for us and it's to put off the old man or the
old nature and to put on the new. Notice in Ephesians 4 in verse 22, the Bible says
that ye put off concerning the former conversation, the old man, which is corrupt according to
the deceitful lust, and be renewed in the spirit of your mind and that ye put on the
new man, which after God is created in righteousness and true holiness. It starts in verse 25 talking
about lying. He says, wherefore, putting away lying, speak every man truth with his
neighbor, for we are members one of another. But then we find in verse 26 that he begins
to deal with this subject of anger. He says, be angry, notice what it says, in sin not.
How many of you have found that's challenging? Because anger often will lead to sin. Be angry
in sin not. Sometimes we talk about, we use this phraseology, righteous indignation. Listen,
here's some things that ought to make us angry, but we ought not sin. Amen? He says,
be angry in sin not. Notice what he says, let not the sun go down upon your wrath, neither
give place to the devil. Verse 28, he begins dealing with stealing, but we focus this morning
on verse 26 and 27 with regard to our context in 1 Timothy 2 and verse number 80 says, I
will therefore that men pray everywhere, lifting up holy hands, the importance of being clean
without wrath, the importance of being controlled by the Spirit of God. Listen, if you're angry,
it's going to hinder your prayer life. It's going to mess up how you pray if you're angry.
If you're angry. And he says that we're to be angry in sin not, let not the sun go down
upon your wrath, neither give place to the devil. You know, the devil's just looking
for a little creak of the door open. That's all he's looking for. Somebody said it this
way, he's looking for a toehold so he can have a foothold so he can have a stronghold.
Yeah. It said that the Sunday school teacher asked the class one day, what are you going
to do if the devil comes knocking at your door? A little boy said, I'm going to let
Jesus answer it. I thought that's wonderful. Amen? Listen, anger is a problem for many
people. The Bible tells us in the book of Proverbs about angry people, angry men.
And we find this morning here in Ephesians and then again in Colossians.
Look over at Colossians 3 and notice what the Bible says there, we need to be controlled
with the Spirit of God.
Anger is a work of the flesh.
Can we be angry in sin?
Not yet, but I feel like a lot of people have a real hard time with that.
Anger is an emotion that we deal with, but we better be filled with the Spirit of God.
We better be controlled by the Holy Spirit.
Notice in Colossians 3 and verse number 8, but now ye also put off all these.
Do you see what's mentioned first, anger, wrath, malice, blasphemy, filthy communication
out of your mouth, lie not one to another, seeing that you have put off the old man with
his deeds and have put on the new man which is renewed in knowledge after the image of
him that created him.
If we want to have effectual prayer, Paul gives in this verse of scripture in the inspirational
Holy Spirit of God, the importance of being clean.
I believe that we see when he says without wrath, the importance of being controlled
by the Spirit of God.
You know it's vital in every area of my life and your life and the Christian life that
we're controlled by the Spirit of God.
It requires that we surrender.
It requires that we die to self.
It requires that we take that position of I die daily, that we understand that I am
crucified with Christ.
Nevertheless I live, yet not I, but Christ liveth in me.
And the life that I live in the flesh, I live how, by the faith of the Son of God who loved
me and gave himself for me.
And we find this morning as we look at this truth of being controlled by the Holy Spirit,
how that that would enable us to have effectual prayer without wrath, without wrath.
This morning there's a lot of angry people in our world, a lot of angry people in our
churches.
It's just true.
People that are angry, that have wrath, it's going to hinder your prayer life, it's going
to hinder your prayer life.
I was offended.
You hear that often today, don't you?
Great peace have they which love thy law, and nothing shall offend them.
Somebody asked this question, I think it's pertinent to deal with, can you offend a dead
person?
And obviously the answer is no.
If I'm truly crucified with Christ, I can't be offended.
But I tell you this morning, if you'd be honest and if I'd be honest and we'd evaluate our
lives, if I'm angry, it messes with my prayer life, it hinders my prayer life.
If you're angry with someone, you're probably not praying for them as you should, right?
Or maybe you're praying some of those imprecatory prayers from the book of Psalms.
And Jesus would say to you, you know not what spirit you're of.
This morning we understand that as we look at this portion of Scripture, He says, I will
therefore that men pray everywhere, but He didn't put a period there.
He said lifting up holy hands, being clean, without wrath, being controlled by the Spirit
of God.
And number three this morning He says, end doubting.
Number three this morning, the importance of praying with confidence, the importance
of praying with confidence.
The idea of this word or this phrase without doubting when it says end doubting is really
this idea of a deliberation or deliberating over something, questioning what is true.
It carries with it the idea of hesitation.
Now you understand what doubt is.
You understand that doubt, I've said this over the years, that if faith is a flower
then doubt is a weed.
And what do the weeds do?
Well the weeds try to choke out the flowers, right?
The weeds in the garden bed, they try to take whatever nutrients are there and they
take those and they choke out what you're trying to grow.
If you had a garden, you're going to plan to have a garden this year.
And it's amazing how that weeds seem to be able to grow everywhere.
It's amazing to me.
Listen, you've got to deal with the weeds.
You say, I'm going to put that off, man, it's going to be a disaster, right?
Have you found it to be the case?
We give you all kinds of ideas of put this down and do this and so on and so forth.
There's proactive need there.
And so we understand doubting.
He says, listen, God does not want us to be doubtful people.
He wants us to have confidence in who He is and what He's able to do.
He wants us to pray with confidence.
He wants us as we go into the presence of God to know with confidence that He hears
us.
He wants us to know with confidence that He's able to do what He only can do.
And so this idea when He says that we're to come lifting up holy hands without wrath and
without doubting, we find this morning that we're to pray with confidence.
Confident that God hears.
Look at the book of Psalms.
I want to read three verses of Scripture from the book of Psalms here.
And just remind us this morning that we ought to be confident that God hears us.
Psalm chapter three, we're going to start there and just look at three references this
morning in the book of Psalms that would help us to understand and to have that confidence
that God hears us.
You ever talk to somebody and you ask them, did you hear me?
You ever have that situation?
And then somebody says, yes, I did.
And they said, what did I say?
Did you ever have that situation?
And then all of a sudden you find out whether they were really listening to you or not,
right?
And we find that God hears us.
Notice in Psalm 3 and verse number 4, notice what the Bible says, I cried unto the Lord
with my voice and He heard me out of His holy hill, Sila.
Just spend a moment and let that sink in.
That I lifted my voice, I cried unto the Lord and He heard me.
And He heard me.
If you ever desired to reach someone, picked up the phone to call them, maybe it was an
urgent situation and you got a voicemail, ever happen?
And you didn't leave a message, you hang up and you call again, why?
Because it's urgent.
You want to talk to them, you want to reach them and you get a voicemail, it can be frustrating.
You understand this morning that God is never busy, God hears us.
I know that we mentioned just a few moments ago where He says, I will not hear, well,
that's because of that sin, that iniquity.
But if we've gone through the process of having holy hands, being clean, then we have this
confidence this morning that God hears us, that God hears us.
He's never too busy for you.
I think about Elijah when he's there at Mount Carmel.
I mean, those false worshippers of Baal, they cried out, they cut themselves, they
did all kinds of things to try to get their false God to answer by fire and nothing happened.
But you know, Elijah, after he repaired the altar and gave some instruction, he prayed
a powerful prayer and he said that he prayed it according to God's instruction and that
he prayed it so that the people would know that God is the God of heaven.
And you know what happened after he prayed just a short prayer?
Fire came from heaven.
God hears us.
The psalmist, if you read Psalm 3 and you understand the context of Psalm 3, David,
we believe is the human penman, I mean, he's in a mess, he's in a lot of trouble.
I mean, he's dealing with great adversity, but he says, I called, I cried unto the Lord
with my voice and he heard me.
He heard me out of his holy hill, Siloam.
Notice in Psalm 116, if you will, and we could again look at so many psalms this morning
of giving the truth where God says, I've heard them, I hear you, I've heard your prayer.
And we look in Psalm 116, notice what the scriptures say.
So often we mention 1 John when the Bible says, I love him because he first loved me.
But notice what the psalmist says here in Psalm 116, I love the Lord, why?
Because he hath heard my voice and my supplications, because he hath inclined his ear unto me,
therefore will I call upon him as long as I live.
Wow, what a great testimony.
The psalmist says, I have confidence that God hears me.
He hears my voice, he hears me when I pray.
And therefore, because I have this confidence, I'm going to call upon him as long as I live.
That ought to be our approach.
That ought to be our perspective.
You know, in the previous text of scripture in Psalm 115, the Bible speaks about those
false idols in verse number six and says, they have ears, but they hear not.
Do you see it there in Psalm 115 and verse six?
They have ears, but they hear not.
But then in Psalm 116, the psalmist says, I love him, why?
I love the Lord because he hath heard my voice and my supplications, because he hath inclined
his ear unto me, therefore will I call upon him as long as I live.
Look in Psalm 120, if you will.
Psalm 120 and verse number one, notice what the psalmist says.
In my distress, have you ever been there?
I mean, if you've never had distress, talk to me after the service.
Anyone who is born a woman in a few days and full of troubles, we have distress in
our lives.
But notice, the psalmist says, in my distress, what did I do?
I cried unto the Lord, and He heard me.
God wants us to pray with confidence.
He says without wrath, but He says without doubting, no hesitation, no deliberating,
no questioning what is true, no.
I enter into the presence of God, Paul says, I will therefore that men pray everywhere,
lifting up holy hands, without wrath, without doubting, knowing, having confidence that
God hears.
Listen this morning, if you have confidence that God hears you, it will cause you to pray
more.
The very practical, basic truth.
And this morning, God has given us example after example, in verse after verse, and promise
after promise that says, I'll hear you.
It ought to encourage us to pray.
We pray with confidence.
Notice not only that we're confident that God hears, but we're confident that God is
able.
That God is able.
You ever pray for something that, I mentioned this, I think, at some point last year.
How many prayers on your prayer list right now, this week, are you praying that only
God can handle?
I'm not talking about praying things that you can manufacture in your own life.
I'm not talking about manufacturing and working in circumstances and all this.
No, no, no.
I'm talking about praying that only God can answer.
Praying specifically, seeing how God can do what only God can do.
We referenced already Jeremiah 33, 3, when God says to Jeremiah, call unto me and I will
answer thee and show thee great and mighty things which thou knowest not.
We're familiar with Ephesians 3 and verse number 20, now unto him which is able to exceeding
abundantly above all that we ask or think, unto him be glory.
Why?
Because it's due unto his name.
Listen, God wants to answer in such a way that only he can receive the glory.
It's not going to be that someone's going to stand around and say, well, you kind of
did that.
You manufactured that.
You schemed and you devised and you, no, no, we need to be praying where only God is going
to get the acknowledgment, where it's obvious that God has done it.
We find this morning that there are many examples throughout the scriptures where we read of
that type of work being done and we find this morning that it ought to be our desire, ought
to be our goal that we see God work and God glorified.
God delights in answering prayer.
God delights in showing himself mighty and powerful.
He delights in working in such a way that only he receives the glory.
So I wonder this morning if we're confident that God hears and we're confident that God
is able, what about your prayer life or what about my prayer life reveals that we're praying
to an omnipotent God?
In 1 John chapter 5, notice what we referenced this verse last week or two weeks ago.
Notice what the Bible says in 1 John 5 and verse number 14.
In 1 John 5 and verse number 14, we're speaking about the importance of praying with confidence
this morning.
He says in 1 John 5, 14, and this is the confidence that we have in him, that if we ask anything
according to his will, he heareth us.
It was in fact last week that we mentioned this verse of Scripture because we talked
about in the very midst of an exhortation on prayer that God reveals to us his will
for humanity.
Why is it that he reveals to us his will for humanity?
Because we're to pray according to his will.
How do we know God's will?
You better get in the Bible.
God reveals his will to us in his word.
And as we study the Scriptures and we know that we're praying according to the will of
God, then we can have that confidence that he hears us.
And we can have that expectancy, anxiously awaiting for God to answer and God to do what
only he can do.
The psalmist says in Psalm 119, it's time, Lord, for thee to work.
Listen, we're living in a time, if the psalmist said it then in Psalm 119 how true it is today,
it's time for God to work.
It's time for God to work.
Amen?
We need to pray that God would do what only God can do.
This morning, you want your prayer life to be effective?
Listen, I'm not interested in religious exercise, mundane, monotonous, just going through the
motions, repeat after me, blah, blah, blah, blah, no, no, I'm not interested in all that.
It's vain.
I'm communing with my Father, I'm entering into his presence.
When you pray, you're entering into the presence of a thrice holy God.
And he says, you want your prayers to be answered?
Understand the importance of being clean.
There's no insin in your life, deal with it.
God says he'll forgive you, he's gracious, he's merciful.
When God puts his finger on that thing, deal with it.
Say as the psalmist said, search me, oh God, show me if there's any wickedness, any wicked
thing, so I can be clean.
The importance of being in control of the Spirit of God, the importance of having confidence.
I believe that if we understand these three prerequisites, if you will, in 1 Timothy 2.8,
it will help each of us to have effectual or effective prayer.
He said of those religious leaders, they have their reward.
That's not the kind of prayer we're looking for.
We're looking for the kind of prayer that our God who sees and hears in secret, answers
openly, and he shows what he's able to do.
This morning, as we evaluate our prayer lives, how effective, effectual is our prayer life?
Is there something that's hindering our prayer life?
How do we get that taken care of?
We come to a gracious, merciful God, say God, would you forgive me, help me to be clean,
help me to have an effective, effectual prayer life.
Let's pray this morning.
Father, we love you, we thank you for loving us.
I thank you for the instruction that you give us in your Word, and God, not only have
you instructed us to pray, but I believe you've revealed to us in your Word how we can have
effectual prayer.
You said that the effectual, fervent prayer of a righteous man availeth much, and we want
to be praying in that manner.
We find in this single verse of Scripture, these three prerequisites, and God, I pray
that you'd help each of us, Lord, to be clean, help us to be controlled by thy Spirit, Lord,
help us not to be walking in the flesh, help us not to be carnal, help us to be spiritual,
controlled by the Holy Spirit.
Help us, Lord, to pray in confidence, believing that you're able.
We thank you that you are the Lord God omnipotent, that you rule and that you reign.
I pray that not one person will leave here this morning with any doubt that you hear
prayer, that you answer prayer, that you're able to do exceeding abundantly above all
that we ask or think.
Help us to pray in according to your will.
I pray that you'd move and work in hearts and lives that only you can.
Well thank you for the work that you'll do, for it's in Christ's name I pray, would you
stand with me?
Heads are bowed, eyes are closed.
I hope this morning you agree with me, I don't want to just go through a religious exercise
of quote-unquote,